[Music]
A fitness instructor unknowingly records
a military convoy rolling towards
Myanmar's parliament to overthrow it.
Filmed in early 2021, it's the only
known footage of the coup and the start
of a devastating war. 4 years on, the
violence remains relentless. Some 82,000
lives have been lost and another 3.2 2
million displaced while the central
government controls just a fifth of the
country. Nearly all major ethnic groups
are fighting one another. And in some
areas, the breakdown is so complete that
people don't even use the national
currency. The resulting power vacuum has
turned Myanmar into a hub for narcotics
production, human trafficking, and
weapons smuggling. It has also quietly
become a regional proxy war, drawing in
China, India, Russia, and the United
States. These competing powers now shape
what has become a widely recognized
failed state, and they may ultimately
determine how long the conflict lasts.
That's how it works in geopolitics. What
isn't stopped is studied and tweaked for
the next war.
Today's sponsor is ODU, the ultimate
all-in-one management software. It
handles everything from invoicing and
accounting to project management,
website creation, and more. Normally,
you would need multiple separate apps to
do what ODU does on its own. But the
best part, the first app is free for
life, including unlimited hosting and
support. So, let's say you want to
launch an e-commerce store. ODO makes it
incredibly easy. Just pick the
e-commerce app, walk through the
configurations with a few simple steps,
and you're up and running. The AI builds
the structure of your site, and from
there, you can drag and drop content,
customize layouts, and add your
products. You can upload images, set
prices, adjust descriptions. Everything
is intuitive and flexible. Essentially,
ODO takes care of the heavy lifting so
you can focus on what matters, selling.
Check out ODO today by hitting the link
in the description and supporting me by
supporting them. Thanks, Odo.
[Music]
Myanmar is collapsing in real time. The
closest thing to a central government is
the state security and peace commission
led by General Minong Hang. Much of the
country, however, has fallen outside the
government's control. Patchworks of
separatist strongholds now dominate vast
areas, each pursuing its own political
goals. In the north, the Kachin
Independence Army seeks full autonomy
for Kachin state, if not outright
independence. In the west, the Arakhan
army is pushing for a self-governed
Rakhine nation with ambitions of
breaking away entirely. In Chinstate,
various militias have turned against
both the central government and one
another with each vying to represent a
future independent Chinland. In the
east, Karen and Kareni armed groups
continued their long-standing fight for
ethnic homelands, while Shaate remains
splintered between rival factions, some
of which favor federal autonomy, others
complete secession. Beyond these ethnic
groups, the People's Defense Force,
which was formed by the exiled civilian
government, now operates across central
and southern Myanmar. It is fighting to
overthrow the military government and
supposedly replace it with a federal
democracy. Though not rooted in any
single ethnicity, its growing presence
has strained relations with ethnic
militias, many of whom reject the idea
of any future union altogether.
Meanwhile, foreign powers have steadily
taken sides behind the scenes. They're
arming proxies, funding factions, and
shaping outcomes from the shadows. China
with its deep investments and strategic
stakes has the most to gain or lose. But
Beijing can't fully back one side
without risking blowback elsewhere.
Instead, it has opted to play all sides
on the ground, hedging its bets, if you
will. It supplies military hardware to
the central government while turning a
blind eye to Chinese-made weapons
flowing to rebel factions. This
balancing act has led to an unspoken
rule in Myanmar. Despite ongoing
hostilities, most armed groups avoid
targeting Chinese assets such as
pipelines, energy terminals, ports, and
economic zones. India has tried to copy
China's balancing strategy, but has
stumbled in the process. Its main focus
has been securing the northeastern
frontier where separatist nationalist
insurgent groups operate from inside
Myanmar. These rebel groups oppose the
Indian government and use Myanmar as a
safe haven to launch attacks. To counter
this, India has quietly cooperated with
Myanmar's military leadership, sharing
intelligence and carrying out crossber
operations.
For instance, in May 2025, Indian forces
engaged a group of insurgents in Manipur
near the Myanmar border. Later in July,
an Indian drone strike eliminated
several separatist commanders inside
Myanmar. These incidents underscore
India's anxiety over regional spillover.
However, unlike China, India lacks
strong ties with Myanmar's ethnic
militias and has little economic
leverage. America has taken a different
approach. Rather than engaging directly,
it has avoided arming the groups
fighting the central government. Its
support has been limited to non-lethal
aid for the exiled civilian government
under which the people's defense force
operates. Most likely though, Washington
is providing more covert assistance than
it publicly admits. At the same time,
the United States has been urging
Thailand to play a more active role in
Myanmar, mindful that some within the
Thai military sympathize with certain
ethnic groups. Thailand, however,
remains cautious. It has little interest
in fueling instability in Myanmar,
knowing it could easily spill across its
borders. Thus, for now, the most
Thailand is willing to do is ignore the
activities of the exiled people's
defense force, many of whom operate from
Thai soil, particularly around the
border town of Mod. Thai lawmakers are
also cautious about challenging China
given its grand strategic interests in
the country. You see, Myanmar is China's
only immediate neighbor that offers
direct overland access to the Indian
Ocean. This route bypasses the South
China Sea and the congested straight of
Malaa where the US Navy could
potentially disrupt shipping during a
major conflict. This 1700 km corridor is
vital not just for exporting Chinese
goods but also for importing fossil
fuels from the Middle East and minerals
from Africa. That's why China has built
oil and gas pipelines from the shores of
the Bay of Bengal to its southern
province of Yunan with plans to add
highways and high-speed rail along the
same route. As part of the plan, Chinese
state-owned companies are working on two
major projects in Rakhine State. A $7.3
billion deep water port at Kiok Fu and a
$1.3 billion special economic zone that
includes an oil and gas terminal. Both
projects sit at the southern end of the
corridor. And so for Beijing, there can
be no half measures in Myanmar.
By any measure, 1988 marked a turning
point for Myanmar. A pro-democracy
movement took to the streets of the
capital, but was then swiftly and
brutally crushed by the military. While
the West imposed sanctions, China
reached out, boosting crossber trade and
selling over a billion dollars worth of
tanks, artillery, armored vehicles,
anti-aircraft systems, and naval
vessels. By doing so, China became
Myanmar's key foreign partner. Yet,
despite growing ties, the relationship
was never built on trust. The fiercely
nationalistic Myanmar military remained
uneasy about its heavy dependence on
China for arms and supplies. Many
officers resented how Beijing treated
the country as a client state. So to
reduce its reliance on China, Myanmar
began building defense ties with Russia,
it bought MiG 29 fighter jets and MI35
helicopter gunships, both of which are
still used to this day. This Russian
supplied air power has become
increasingly crucial in recent years as
government forces have struggled on the
ground. Helicopter gunships now
frequently attack rebel controlled towns
and villages across the country. Right
or wrong, Russia has been instrumental
to the central government in Myanmar.
But with its attention and resources
consumed by the war in Ukraine, it's
unclear how much of that support still
continues today. What we do know is
this. While China and Russia cooperate
closely in the Ukrainian battle space,
they appear to be pursuing separate
agendas in Myanmar. America, for its
part, has responded by imposing
sanctions on Myanmar's military
government, targeting officials and
their business interests. At the same
time, a massive new US consulate complex
budgeted at roughly $248 million is
being built to replace and expand the
existing facility in the northern Thai
city of Chiang Mai. The consulate is
widely believed to be part of a broader
effort to expand American intelligence
capabilities in the region. Once
operational, Washington could use the
new facility to supply intelligence to
rebel factions and influence the course
of the conflict. Elsewhere, there are
indications the US may be deepening its
involvement. Local sources claim the US
is contemplating plans to establish a
large supply base in Cox's Bazaar in
Bangladesh to support insurgent groups
like the Arakhan army and the Chin
National Front. They also suggest the US
could impose a no-fly zone over Rakhine
state to neutralize the Myanmar Air
Force from supporting its troops on the
ground. Although these claims remain
unproven, the focus on Myanmar's western
coast makes strategic sense.
Establishing friendly or autonomous
territories near the Indian and
Bangladeshi borders would put pressure
on China's overland corridor from Yunan
and threaten its access to the deep
water port at Kyok Pew. However, while
Washington works to undermine China's
corridor, Beijing is working just as
hard to entrench it. Since the coup,
China has sold over $260 million worth
of weapons to the central government.
while also quietly arming rebel groups,
especially in the north. The bulk of
these weapons has gone to the United W
State Army, which in turn has supplied
other rebel groups, including the
Arakhan army. By playing both sides,
China has now become the sole external
power able to broker peace. It recently
helped negotiate a truce between some
rebel groups in northern Shan state and
the central government. And with the
Arakan army gaining ground in Rakin
state, thanks in part to United Wah
State Army supplied weapons, it's just a
matter of time before China intervenes
there, too. If this plays out, Chinese
interests will inevitably clash with
American designs, and the ground between
may well taste the whip twice.
I've been your host, Shiron, from
Caspian Report. If you approve of what
we do, please leave a comment, hit the
like button, and mayhaps share the
video. In any case, thank you for your
time and So,
[Music]